.\"-
.\" Copyright 2015 Shawn Webb <shawn.webb@hardenedbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted providing that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 29, 2016
.Dt HBSD-UPDATE.CONF 5
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm hbsd-update.conf
.Nd configuration file for
.Xr hbsd-update 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file controls the behavior of the
.Xr hbsd-update 8
tool. The file is parsed by
.Xr sh 1
and follows its syntax for declaring variables.
.Pp
The possible options and their meanings are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm baseurl"
.It Cm baseurl
The base of the URL from which to derive the update download
location.
.It Cm capath
The path (file or directory) of the CA cert(s) to use for verification
of signed binary updates.
.It Cm dnsrec
The DNS TXT record to use to look up version information.
If DNS is not desired and the update publisher supports version info
via an update-latest.txt file placed in the root of the 
.Pa baseurl
this option can be omitted.
.It Cm kernel
Update packages can contain multiple kernels.
This option specifies which kernel to install.
.It Cm dnssec
By default, the DNS TXT record is validated with DNSSEC.
Setting this variable to
.Dq no
instead of the default
.Dq yes
disables DNSSEC validation.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/hbsd-update.conf"
.It Pa /etc/hbsd-update.conf
Default location of the
.Cm hbsd-update
configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hbsd-update 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Shawn Webb Aq Mt shawn.webb@hardenedbsd.org
