.\"-
.\" Copyright 2015 Shawn Webb <shawn.webb@hardenedbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted providing that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 30, 2015
.Dt HBSD-UPDATE-BUILD.CONF 5
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm hbsd-update-build.conf
.Nd configuration file for
.Xr hbsd-update-build 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file controls the behavior of the
.Xr hbsd-update-build 8
tool. The file is parsed by
.Xr sh 1
and follows its syntax for declaring variables.
.Pp
The possible options and their meanings are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm OUTPUTDIR"
.It Cm BRANCH
The git branch or tag to use after doing the initial code checkout.
(Default: 
.Dq hardened/current/master )
.It Cm CHROOTDIR
The directory to use in building a chroot environment for building
release artifacts.
(Default:
.Dq /builds/updater/chroot )
.It Cm DEBUGBUILD
Include .debug files in release artifacts.
Empty means yes.
(Default:
.Dq )
.It Cm DEVMODE
Use -DNO_CLEAN and -DNO_KERNELCLEAN when building world and kernel.
Set to
.Dq yes
to enable.
(Default:
.Dq )
.It Cm FULLCLEAN
Preserve the chroot directory.
(Default:
.Dq no )
.It Cm KERNELS
Space-separated list of kernels to build and include in the update
archive.
(Default:
.Dq HARDENEDBSD )
.It Cm LOGDIR
Directory to place build logs.
(Default:
.Dq /builds/updater/logs )
.It Cm OUTPUTDIR
Directory to place deployable update archives.
(Default:
.Dq /builds/updater/output )
.It Cm PRIVKEY
Private RSA key for use in signing the build artifacts within the
update archive.
(Default:
.Dq /usr/share/keys/updater/private/updater.key )
.It Cm PUBKEY
Public X.509 certificate that corresponds to the
.Pa PRIVKEY .
This file gets included in the update archive and verified by the
.Xr hbsd-update 8
tool prior to applying a downloaded update.
(Default:
.Dq /usr/share/keys/updater/certs/updater.crt )
.It Cm REPO
URL of the git repository to clone and use when building the release
artifacts.
(Default
.Dq git://github.com/HardenedBSD/hardenedBSD.git )
.It Cm SIGNBIN
Path to the OpenSSL binary. This option included in case the user
performing the build wishes to switch to LibreSSL.
(Default:
.Dq /usr/bin/openssl )
.It Cm SRCCONFPATH
Path to a custom
.Xr src.conf 5
to use when building the release artifacts.
(Default:
.Dq )
.It Cm SRCDIR
Path to the src directory to use when preparing the chroot jail.
(Default:
.Dq /usr/src )
.It Cm STAGEDIR
Path to the staging directory where release artifacts are placed.
(Default:
.Dq /builds/updater/stage )
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/hbsd-update.conf"
.It Pa /etc/hbsd-update.conf
Default location of the
.Cm hbsd-update
configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hbsd-update 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Shawn Webb Aq Mt shawn.webb@hardenedbsd.org
