.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2014-2018 Shawn Webb <shawn.webb@hardenedbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Oliver Pinter <oliver.pinter@hardenedbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 22, 2018
.Dt ASLR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aslr
.Nd Address Space Layout Randomization
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/pax.h
.Pp
In the kernel configuration file:
.Cd "options PAX"
.Cd "options PAX_ASLR"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Introduction
Security in
.Fx
is based primarily in policy-based technologies.
Existing tools such as
.Xr jail 4 ,
.Xr capsicum 4 ,
.Xr VNET 9 , and the
.Xr mac 4
framework can make
.Fx Ns -based systems quite resilient against
attacks.
FreeBSD lacks basic low-level exploit mitigation, such as Address
Space Layout Randomization (ASLR).
ASLR Randomizes the address space layout of an application, making
exploitation difficult for an attacker.
This manual page and the associated implementation aim to
provide a secure, robust, extensible, and easily-managed form of ASLR
fit for production use in
.Fx Ns .
.Ss General Overview
When compiled with the 
.Cd option PAX_ASLR
, systems will have ASLR enabled.
For systems with that kernel option enabled, if a user wants
to disable ASLR for a given application, the user must force that
application to opt-out.
HardenedBSD has a special application called secadm for opting
applications in to or out of exploit mitigation features such as ASLR.
.Pp
Another kernel option,
.Cd PAX_SYSCTLS ,
exposes additional
.Xr sysctl 8
tunables, allowing ASLR behavior control without requiring a reboot.
By default, the tunable hardening.pax.aslr.status can only be changed
at boot time via /boot/loader.conf.
Enabling the PAX_SYSCTLS kernel option allows a root user to modify
hardening.pax.aslr.status at run time.
See Appendix A for a list of all the tunables.
.Pp
ASLR tunables are per-jail and each jail inherits its parent jail's
settings.
Having per-jail tunables allows more flexibility in shared-hosting
environments.
This structure also allows a user to selectively disable ASLR for
applications that misbehave.
ASLR-disabled applications will still have policy-based security
applied to it by virtue of being jailed.
.Pp
When the kernel option
.Cd PAX_JAIL_SUPPORT
is set, the hardening.pax.aslr.status tunable may be set via the
.Xr jail 8
command line.
.Ss Implementation Details
A new sysinit subroutine ID, SI_SUB_PAX, initializes ASLR system
variables.
Upon system boot, tunables from /boot/loader.conf are checked for
validity.
Any invalid values generate a warning message to the console and the
tunable is set to a sensible default.
.Pp
For the sake of performance, the ASLR system relies on per-process
deltas rather than calling
.Xr arc4random 3
for each mapping.
When a process calls
.Xr execve 2
.Ns , the ASLR deltas are initialized.
Deltas are randomly generated for the execution base,
.Xr mmap 2
.Ns , and stack addresses.
Only the execution base of applications compiled as Position
Independent Executables (PIEs) is randomized.
The execution base of non-PIE applications is not modified.
The mappings of shared objects are randomized for both PIE and non-PIE
applications.
.Pp
The deltas are used as a hint to the Virtual Memory (VM) system.
The VM system may modify the hint to make a better fit for superpages
and other alignment constraints.
.Pp
The delta applied to the PIE execbase is different than the delta
applied to the base address of shared objects.
In the Executable and Linkable File (ELF) image handler, the
execution base of PIE applications is randomized by adding the
execbase delta to et_dyn_addr, which is initialized to be
ET_DYN_LOAD_ADDR (an architecture-dependent macro).
The base address of shared objects loaded by the dynamic linker are
randomized by applying the delta controlled by the
mmap delta in
.Fn sys_mmap
.Ns .
Stack randomization is implemented using a small stack gap
and a bigger random, which applies to the stack's mapping.
Randomizing the top of the stack in addition to applying a
random-sized gap allows the ASLR implementation to introduce more
entropy.
On amd64 and arm64, HardenedBSD is able to introduce 42 quality bits
of randomization onto the stack.
On executable image activation, the stack delta is computed and
subtracted from the top of the stack.
.Pp
Shared object load order in the
.Xr rtld 1
can optionally be randomized with respect to the Depenency Acyclical
Graph (DAG).
Randomizing the DAG helps prevent successful ROP gadget creation by
further removing deterministic loading of shared objects.
Often, when ROP gadgets are generated, the generation requires shared
objects providing gadgets to be in the same spot in memory relative to
the ASLR deltas.
Opting applications in to shared library load order randomization
requires use of per-application toggles, like that provided by
.Pp
The clever use of deltas provides sufficient entropy to successfully
increase the cost of successful remote attacks.
Since deltas shift the various logical allocations that make up an
executable image, performance should not be hindered.
Implementations that do not use deltas may incur significant
performance and memory fragmentation issues for long-lived processes.
.Pp
On a 64-bit system without 32-bit compatibility support, the following
deltas are calculated:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
PIE execution base
.It
Non-fixed new memory mappings (
.Xr mmap 2 )
.It
Stack
.It
The shared page (also known as the VDSO)
.El
.Xr secadm(8) .
.Ss APPENDIX A
NOTE: All tunables can only be changed during boot-time via
.Fa /boot/loader.conf
unless the kernel has been compiled with
.Cd PAX_SYSCTLS
.Ns .
.Bl -bullet
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.status
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Toggle system-wide ASLR protection.
.It
Values:
.br
0 - ASLR disabled system-wide. Individual applications may
.Em NOT
opt in.
.br
1 - ASLR disabled but applications may opt in.
.br
2 - ASLR enabled and applications may opt out.
.br
3 - ASLR enabled for all applications. Applications may not opt out.
.It
Default: 2
.El
.El
.Pp
When
.Cd COMPAT_FREEBSD32
is enabled in the kernel:
.Bl -bullet
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.compat.status
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Toggle system-wide ASLR protection compatible with 32-bit
applications.
.It
Values:
.br
0 - 32-bit compatible ASLR disabled system-wide. Individual
applications may
.Em NOT
opt in.
.br
1 - 32-bit compatible ASLR disabled but applications may opt in.
.br
2 - 32-bit compatible ASLR enabled and applications may opt out.
.br
3 - 32-bit compatible ASLR enabled for all applications. Applications
may not opt out.
.It
Default: 2
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rtld 1 ,
.Xr mmap 2 ,
.Xr elf 3 ,
.Xr mac 4
.Rs
.%T "PaX ASLR"
.%U http://pax.grsecurity.net/docs/aslr.txt
.Re
.Rs
.%T "HardenedBSD"
.%U http://hardenedbsd.org/
.Re
.Rs
.%T "secadm"
.%U https://github.com/HardenedBSD/secadm
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An -nosplit
.An Shawn Webb .
The ASLR implementation was written by
.An Oliver Pinter and
.An Shawn Webb .
.Sh BUGS
The original PaX implementation, from which the HardenedBSD
implementation also drew inspiration, uses a special ELF process
header which requires modification of executable files.
The authors of the HardenedBSD implementation have deliberately chosen
to go a different route based on the
.Xr mac 4
framework.
Support for filesystem extended attributes will be added at a later
time.
.Pp
The shared object load order randomization can lend itself to
interesting behavior.
If multiple libraries contain symbols of the same name, randomizing
the order in which shared libraries get loaded can cause symbol
lookups to resolve to the wrong symbol.
Though incorrect resolution is rare, it is known to happen.
Privoxy is one such example.
Privoxy's list of dependencies are small, but two of them implement
symbols of the same name.
If Privoxy's dependencies are loaded in the wrong order, Privoxy will
reference the wrong symbol and will crash.
Shared library load order randomization can be disabled on a
per-application basis with secadm for such cases.
Work is underway to make shared object load order randomization more
robust and prevent symbol resolution conflicts.
.Pp
Address Space Layout Randomization may be bypassed with information
leak vulnerabilities.
Several advancements in CPU microarchitecture side channel
vulnerability research and development have proven that ASLR is meant
to help protect against wholly remote attacks.
As such, ASLR does not protect against local attacks, including
remotely-fetched javascript executed within a browser context.
